README.md, before:

# X11Libre Alpine ports for Chimera Linux

Cports is a collection of source X11Libre ports for Chimera. The system has been
written specifically for the distribution using the Python scripting language.

If you are familiar with cports, this is the same system based off [cports](https://github.com/chimera-linux/cports), but designed for just X11Libre as [this isn't getting upstreamed into cports](https://gts.chimera-linux.org/@chimera/statuses/01JYYNAB4GFQ8Q5JZZ92TRM4WF).

From user standpoint, it works similarly to many distro packaging systems (users
of Void Linux `xbps-src` will most likely find it a little familiar) however it
is not based on any existing system and should not be considered a variant of any.

There are two authoritative documents on the system:

* [`Usage.md`](Usage.md) is the reference for users. It covers usage of `cbuild` and its
  basic and advanced options as well as concepts and requirements.
* [`Packaging.md`](Packaging.md) is the reference manual for packagers. It covers the API of the
  system and guidelines for creating and modifying templates, but not usage.

Most people looking to get involved with the project should read both.

To get started, read [`Usage.md`](Usage.md) first.

## Using cports with Chimera

You might want to test your built packages in an actual Chimera system. Since
`cbuild` creates a regular `apk` repository for you, this is as simple as
adding the repositories in your system.

Consider path to `cports` at `/home/user/cports`. The default repository path
for `cbuild` is the `packages` directory directly in `cports`. This is not
the actual repo yet, as there are multiple categories. The actual repositories
are those that have a directory named like your architecture (e.g. `x86_64`)
with the file `APKINDEX.tar.gz` in them.

Create a file `/etc/apk/repositories.d/00-cports.list`. The file must have
the `.list` extension. Put something like this in there:

```
/home/user/cports/packages/main
/home/user/cports/packages/user
```

This will give `apk` access to the `main` and `user` packages of your local
repository. You might want to restrict this list to only the repositories that
you have.

If you want access to local `-dbg` packages, you will also want to add the `debug`
sub-repositories, e.g. `/home/user/cports/packages/main/debug`.

You will also want to drop your signing public key in `/etc/apk/keys`. The key
can be located in `etc/keys` in the `cports` directory, with the `.pub` extension
(do not put in the private key).

### Pinning the repositories

You might also want to pin the local repository. This will effectively make `apk`
prefer your pinned repository even if a newer version if available in remote
repos. This is done by adding a prefix such as `@cports` before the repository
line, e.g. `@cports /home/user/cports/packages/main`. Then you can install things
from the repository like `apk add foo@cports`. If you just `apk add foo`, the
tagged repositories will be ignored.

Note that dependencies of packages from pinned repositories will still be pulled
from unpinned repositories preferentially, but pinned repositories will be used
if necessary. This is not the case for dependencies of packages from unpinned
repositories, which will only ever be pulled from unpinned repositories.

## Bootstrapping installations from repositories

For instructions on how to bootstrap the system into a target root as well as
some more advanced tooling for e.g. creation of actual images, check out the
[chimera-live](https://github.com/chimera-linux/chimera-live) repository.

Commit message:

add notice on q66 calling out on the project
q66 is already making fun of the project by calling "anyone who breaks their system with that fully deserves so and will be laughed at", i believe that bulling won't make a difference and this fediverse post already been added to the Xlibre wiki as a reason why upstream won't add it.

README.md, after:

# X11Libre Alpine ports for Chimera Linux

Cports is a collection of source X11Libre ports for Chimera. The system has been
written specifically for the distribution using the Python scripting language.

If you are familiar with cports, this is the same system based off [cports](https://github.com/chimera-linux/cports), but designed for just X11Libre as [this isn't getting upstreamed into cports](https://gts.chimera-linux.org/@chimera/statuses/01JYYNAB4GFQ8Q5JZZ92TRM4WF).

This project is already getting being called out from the main Chimera developers [as "anyone who breaks their system with that fully deserves so and will be laughed at"](https://gts.q66.moe/@q66/statuses/01KCGZ33XYS5XBN1N95JGP6197) but this won't stop us from maintaining it. 

**Issues will be sorted if you install a Xlibre package and then install any packages after that rely on X11 on your system, just hit us with an [issue report](https://github.com/xlibre-alpine/xlibre-ports/issues).**

From user standpoint, it works similarly to many distro packaging systems (users
of Void Linux `xbps-src` will most likely find it a little familiar) however it
is not based on any existing system and should not be considered a variant of any.

There are two authoritative documents on the system:

* [`Usage.md`](Usage.md) is the reference for users. It covers usage of `cbuild` and its
  basic and advanced options as well as concepts and requirements.
* [`Packaging.md`](Packaging.md) is the reference manual for packagers. It covers the API of the
  system and guidelines for creating and modifying templates, but not usage.

Most people looking to get involved with the project should read both.

To get started, read [`Usage.md`](Usage.md) first.

## Using cports with Chimera

You might want to test your built packages in an actual Chimera system. Since
`cbuild` creates a regular `apk` repository for you, this is as simple as
adding the repositories in your system.

Consider path to `cports` at `/home/user/cports`. The default repository path
for `cbuild` is the `packages` directory directly in `cports`. This is not
the actual repo yet, as there are multiple categories. The actual repositories
are those that have a directory named like your architecture (e.g. `x86_64`)
with the file `APKINDEX.tar.gz` in them.

Create a file `/etc/apk/repositories.d/00-cports.list`. The file must have
the `.list` extension. Put something like this in there:

```
/home/user/cports/packages/main
/home/user/cports/packages/user
```

This will give `apk` access to the `main` and `user` packages of your local
repository. You might want to restrict this list to only the repositories that
you have.

If you want access to local `-dbg` packages, you will also want to add the `debug`
sub-repositories, e.g. `/home/user/cports/packages/main/debug`.

You will also want to drop your signing public key in `/etc/apk/keys`. The key
can be located in `etc/keys` in the `cports` directory, with the `.pub` extension
(do not put in the private key).

### Pinning the repositories

You might also want to pin the local repository. This will effectively make `apk`
prefer your pinned repository even if a newer version if available in remote
repos. This is done by adding a prefix such as `@cports` before the repository
line, e.g. `@cports /home/user/cports/packages/main`. Then you can install things
from the repository like `apk add foo@cports`. If you just `apk add foo`, the
tagged repositories will be ignored.

Note that dependencies of packages from pinned repositories will still be pulled
from unpinned repositories preferentially, but pinned repositories will be used
if necessary. This is not the case for dependencies of packages from unpinned
repositories, which will only ever be pulled from unpinned repositories.

## Bootstrapping installations from repositories

For instructions on how to bootstrap the system into a target root as well as
some more advanced tooling for e.g. creation of actual images, check out the
[chimera-live](https://github.com/chimera-linux/chimera-live) repository.
